Add User Guide (#386)
submariner-io/submariner-website: src/content/operations/usage/_index.en.md

+++
title = "User Guide"
date = 2020-05-04T19:01:14+05:30
weight = 15
+++

## Overview

This guide is intended for users who have a Submariner environment set up and want to verify the installation and learn more about how to
use Submariner and the main capabilities it provides. This guide assumes that there are two Kubernetes clusters,

> **cluster-2** and **cluster-3**, forming a clusterset, and that the Broker is deployed into a separate cluster **cluster-1**.

Reviewer: cluster2 or cluster-2?

> 

Reviewer: Might add: Make sure you have `subctl` set up (because Submariner could be set up using Helm, though not recommended)

{{% notice note %}}

> This guides focuses on a non-Globalnet Submariner deployment.

Reviewer: typo: guide, or focus

{{% /notice %}}

### 1. Validate the Installation

#### Broker

The Broker facilitates the exchange of metadata information between the connected clusters, enabling them to discover one another.
The Broker consists of a set of Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) only; there are no Pods or Services deployed with it.

> You can use this command to validate that the Broker namespace has been created in the Broker cluster:

Reviewer: Maybe add `kubectl config use-context` cluster-1? but the description makes it clear which cluster to use

```bash
$ kubectl get namespace submariner-k8s-broker
NAME                    STATUS   AGE
submariner-k8s-broker   Active   5m
```

You can use this command to validate that the Submariner CRDs have been created in the Broker cluster:

```bash
$ kubectl get crd | grep submariner
clusters.submariner.io                    2020-11-30T13:49:16Z
endpoints.submariner.io                   2020-11-30T13:49:16Z
gateways.submariner.io                    2020-11-30T13:49:16Z
serviceimports.lighthouse.submariner.io   2020-11-30T13:49:16Z
```

You can use this command to validate that the participating clusters have successfully joined the Broker:

```bash
$ kubectl -n submariner-k8s-broker get clusters.submariner.io
NAME       AGE
cluster2   5m9s
cluster3   2m9s
```

#### Connected Clusters

> You can use this command to monitor as all required Submariner components are being installed on the connected clusters:

Reviewer: also here: `kubectl config use-context` ?

submariner-lighthouse-agent-586cf4899-wn747    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-lighthouse-coredns-c88f64f5-h77kw   1/1     Running   0          73s
submariner-lighthouse-coredns-c88f64f5-qlw4x   1/1     Running   0          73s
submariner-operator-dcbdf5669-n7jgp            1/1     Running   0          89s
submariner-routeagent-bmgbc                    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-routeagent-rl9nh                    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-routeagent-wqmzs                    1/1     Running   0          75s
```

You can use this command to verify on which node the Gateway Engine is running on:

```bash
$ kubectl get node --selector=submariner.io/gateway=true -o wide
NAME              STATUS   ROLES    AGE     VERSION   INTERNAL-IP   EXTERNAL-IP   OS-IMAGE       KERNEL-VERSION           CONTAINER-RUNTIME
cluster2-worker   Ready    <none>   6h59m   v1.17.0   172.17.0.7    <none>        Ubuntu 19.10   5.8.18-200.fc32.x86_64   containerd://1.3.2
```

You can use this command to quickly verify the connection between the participating clusters:
<!-- markdownlint-disable no-trailing-spaces -->
```bash
$ subctl show connections

> Showing information for cluster "cluster2":

Reviewer: above it is named "cluster-2"

  UID:                 682f791a-00b5-4f51-8249-80c7c82c4bbf
Status:
  Connections:
    Endpoint:
      Backend:          libreswan
      cable_name:       submariner-cable-cluster3-172-17-0-10
      cluster_id:       cluster3
      Health Check IP:  10.3.224.0
      Hostname:         cluster3-worker
      nat_enabled:      false
      private_ip:       172.17.0.10
      public_ip:        
      Subnets:
        100.3.0.0/16
        10.3.0.0/16
    Latency:
      Average RTT:   472623
      Last RTT:      583181
      Max RTT:       2603444
      Min RTT:       80202
      Stddev RTT:    164687
    Status:          connected
    Status Message:  
  Ha Status:         active
  Local Endpoint:
    Backend:          libreswan
    cable_name:       submariner-cable-cluster2-172-17-0-7
    cluster_id:       cluster2
    Health Check IP:  10.2.224.0
    Hostname:         cluster2-worker
    nat_enabled:      false
    private_ip:       172.17.0.7
    public_ip:        
    Subnets:
      100.2.0.0/16
      10.2.0.0/16
  Status Failure:  
  Version:         v0.8.0-pre0-1-g5d7f163
Events:            <none>
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-trailing-spaces -->

> To verify that service discovery is installed properly, check that the `submariner-lighthouse-coredns` service is ready:

Reviewer: Are you still on cluster2? Maybe add that again, it confuses me a little (maybe it's only me though :D)

```bash
$ kubectl -n submariner-operator get service submariner-lighthouse-coredns
NAME                            TYPE        CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)   AGE
submariner-lighthouse-coredns   ClusterIP   100.2.177.123   <none>        53/UDP    126m
```

> Next, verify that CoreDNS was properly configured to forward requests sent to `clusterset.local` to Lighthouse CoreDNS Server in the

Reviewer: Maybe: atm only CoreDNS is supportet, KubeDNS would look the same

cluster:

```bash
$ kubectl -n kube-system describe configmap coredns
Name:         coredns
Namespace:    kube-system
Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>

Data
====
Corefile:
----
#lighthouse-start AUTO-GENERATED SECTION. DO NOT EDIT
clusterset.local:53 {
    forward . 100.2.177.123
}
#lighthouse-end
.:53 {
    errors
    health {
       lameduck 5s
    }
    ready
    kubernetes cluster2.local in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa {
       pods insecure
       fallthrough in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa
       ttl 30
    }
    prometheus :9153
    forward . /etc/resolv.conf
    cache 30
    loop
    reload
    loadbalance
}
```

Note that **100.2.177.123** is the ClusterIP address of the `submariner-lighthouse-coredns` service we verified earlier.

### 2. Export Services Across Clusters

At this point, we have enabled secure IP communication between the connected clusters. However, further configuration is required in order
to signify that a Service should be visible and discoverable to other clusters in the clusterset. This is done by creating a `ServiceExport`

> object in each cluster within the namespace that the underlying Service resides in. When a `ServiceExport` is created, this will cause

Reviewer: Add reminder that the namespace must exist in both clusters, with the default ns this is not totally clear as it automatically exists

> the multi-cluster service to become accessible as `<service>.<ns>.svc.clusterset.local`. Similarly, deleting the `ServiceExport` will stop

Reviewer: Service

exporting the Service.

This guide uses a simple nginx server for demonstration purposes.

#### Test ClusterIP Service

A Kubernetes Service is an abstraction which defines a logical set of Pods running in your cluster, that all provide the same functionality.
When created, each Service is assigned a unique IP address. This address is tied to the lifespan of the Service.
Pods can be configured to talk to the Service, and know that communication to the Service will be automatically load-balanced out to some
Pod that is a member of the Service. ClusterIP is the default ServiceType in Kubernetes, and is only accessible from within the cluster.

> Submariner makes it possible for a ClusterIP service to be accessible across cluster boundaries.

Reviewer: Service

> ##### 1. Create an `nginx` Pod on **cluster-3**

Reviewer: cluster3?

Create a Pod with the following Deployment specification:

```bash
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      run: nginx
  replicas: 1
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        run: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: nginx
        image: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
```

Apply the configuration and check that the Pod is running:

```bash
kubectl apply -f ./nginx.yaml
```

```bash
$ kubectl get pods -l run=nginx -o wide
NAME                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP         NODE               NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
nginx-86c57db685-twxz4   1/1     Running   0          3m    10.3.0.4   cluster3-worker2   <none>           <none>
```

> ##### 2. Create an `nginx` Service on **cluster-3**

Reviewer: cluster3?

`kubectl apply` the following yaml:

```bash
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: nginx
  labels:
    run: nginx
spec:

>   ports:

Reviewer: Maybe add type: ClusterIP, though this should be clear

<!-- markdownlint-disable no-trailing-spaces -->
```bash
$ kubectl describe serviceexports
Name:         nginx
Namespace:    default
Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>
API Version:  multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
Kind:         ServiceExport
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2020-11-30T17:18:44Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    48072
  Self Link:           /apis/multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1/namespaces/default/serviceexports/nginx
  UID:                 00096bcb-6383-4345-875b-4050f7b1a3a1
Status:
  Conditions:
    Last Transition Time:  2020-11-30T17:18:44Z
    Message:               Awaiting sync of the ServiceImport to the broker
    Reason:                AwaitingSync
    Status:                False
    Type:                  Valid
    Last Transition Time:  2020-11-30T17:18:44Z
    Message:               Service was successfully synced to the broker
    Reason:                
    Status:                True
    Type:                  Valid
Events:                    <none>
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-trailing-spaces -->
When the Service is exported successfully, it can be discovered as `nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local` across the clusterset.

> ##### 4. Test Service Discovery on **cluster-2**

Reviewer: Cluster2?

> First, verify that the exported `nginx` Service was imported to **cluster-2**. Submariner (via Lighthouse) automatically creates a

Reviewer: cluster2

corresponding `ServiceImport`:

```bash
$ kubectl get -n submariner-operator serviceimport
NAME                     TYPE           IP                AGE
nginx-default-cluster3   ClusterSetIP   [100.3.220.176]   13m
```

> Next, run a test Pod on **cluster-2** and try to access the `nginx` Service from within the Pod:

Reviewer: cluster2?

```bash

> kubectl -n default  run --generator=run-pod/v1 \

Reviewer: maybe leave `-n default` out, as it is not added when creating the Service

;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; WARNING: .local is reserved for Multicast DNS
;; You are currently testing what happens when an mDNS query is leaked to DNS
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 34800
;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1
;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
; COOKIE: 6ff7ea72c14ce2d4 (echoed)
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local. IN	A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local. 5 IN A	100.3.220.176

;; Query time: 16 msec
;; SERVER: 100.2.0.10#53(100.2.0.10)
;; WHEN: Mon Nov 30 17:52:55 UTC 2020
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 125
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-hard-tabs -->
Note that DNS resolution works across the clusters, and that the IP address **100.3.220.176** returned is the same ClusterIP associated with
the `nginx` Service on **cluster-3**.

{{% notice note %}}
When a single ClusterIP Service is deployed and exported from multiple clusters, Lighthouse DNS serves the local cluster first before
routing the traffic to other remote clusters.
{{% /notice %}}

#### Test StatefulSet and Headless Service

> Submariner also supports headless Services with StatefulSets, making it possible to access individual Pods via their stable DNS name.

Reviewer: Headless?

> Submariner also supports headless Services with StatefulSets, making it possible to access individual Pods via their stable DNS name.

Reviewer: Headless?

Kubernetes supports this by introducing stable Pod IDs composed of `<pod-name>.<svc-name>.<ns>.svc.cluster.local` within a single cluster,
which Submariner extends to `<pod-name>.<cluster-id>.<svc-name>.<ns>.svc.clusterset.local` across the clusterset. The headless Service in
this case offers one single Service for all the underlying Pods.

Like a Deployment, a StatefulSet manages Pods that are based on an identical container spec. Unlike a Deployment, a StatefulSet maintains a

> sticky identity for each of their Pods. StatefulSets are typically used for applications that require stable unique network identifiers,

Reviewer: its Pods

persistent storage, and ordered deployment and scaling.

> ##### 1. Create StatefulSet and headless Service on **cluster-3**

Reviewer: Headless and cluster3?

`kubectl apply` the following yaml:

```bash
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: nginx-ss
 labels:
   app.kubernetes.io/instance: nginx-ss
   app.kubernetes.io/name: nginx-ss
spec:
 ports:
 - port: 80
   name: web
 clusterIP: None
 selector:
   app.kubernetes.io/instance: nginx-ss
   app.kubernetes.io/name: nginx-ss
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: StatefulSet
metadata:
 name: web
spec:
 serviceName: "nginx-ss"
 replicas: 2
 selector:
   matchLabels:
       app.kubernetes.io/instance: nginx-ss
       app.kubernetes.io/name: nginx-ss
 template:
   metadata:
     labels:
       app.kubernetes.io/instance: nginx-ss
       app.kubernetes.io/name: nginx-ss
   spec:
     containers:
     - name: nginx-ss
       image: nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged:stable-alpine
       ports:
       - containerPort: 80
         name: web
```

> This specification will create a StatefulSet named `web` which indicates that 3 replicas of the `nginx` container will be launched in unique

Reviewer: in the spec it is 2 replicas :D

> Pods. This also creates a headless Service called `nginx-ss` on the default namespace. Note that headless Service is requested by

Reviewer: Headless?

explicitly specifying "None" for the clusterIP (.spec.clusterIP).

```bash
$ kubectl apply -f ./nginx-ss.yaml
service/nginx-ss created
statefulset.apps/web created
```

Verify the Service and StatefulSet:

```bash
$ kubectl get service nginx-ss
NAME       TYPE        CLUSTER-IP   EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)   AGE
nginx-ss   ClusterIP   None         <none>        80/TCP    83s
```

```bash
$ kubectl describe statefulset web
Name:               web
Namespace:          default
CreationTimestamp:  Mon, 30 Nov 2020 21:53:01 +0200
Selector:           app.kubernetes.io/instance=nginx-ss,app.kubernetes.io/name=nginx-ss
Labels:             <none>
Annotations:        <none>

> Replicas:           2 desired | 2 total

Reviewer: also here, 2 replicas

API Version:  multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
Kind:         ServiceExport
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2020-11-30T19:59:44Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    83431
  Self Link:           /apis/multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1/namespaces/default/serviceexports/nginx-ss
  UID:                 2c0d6419-6160-431e-990c-8a9993363b10
Status:
  Conditions:
    Last Transition Time:  2020-11-30T19:59:44Z
    Message:               Awaiting sync of the ServiceImport to the broker
    Reason:                AwaitingSync
    Status:                False
    Type:                  Valid
    Last Transition Time:  2020-11-30T19:59:44Z
    Message:               Service was successfully synced to the broker
    Reason:                
    Status:                True
    Type:                  Valid
Events:                    <none>
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-trailing-spaces -->
When the Service is exported successfully, it can be discovered as `nginx-ss.default.svc.clusterset.local` across the clusterset.
In addition, the individual Pods can be accessed as `web-0.cluster-3.nginx-ss.default.svc.clusterset.local` and
`web-1.cluster-3.nginx-ss.default.svc.clusterset.local`.

> ##### 3. Test Service Discovery on **cluster-2**

Reviewer: cluster2

> Verify that the exported `nginx-ss` Service was imported to **cluster-2**. Submariner (via Lighthouse) automatically creates a

Reviewer: cluster2

corresponding `ServiceImport`:

```bash
$ kubectl get -n submariner-operator serviceimport
NAME                        TYPE           IP                AGE
nginx-default-cluster3      ClusterSetIP   [100.3.220.176]   166m
nginx-ss-default-cluster3   Headless                         5m48s
```

> Next, run a test Pod on **cluster-2** and try to access the `nginx-ss` Service from within the Pod:

Reviewer: cluster2

```bash

> kubectl -n default  run --generator=run-pod/v1 \

Reviewer: keep `-n default` in?

;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 19729
;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 2, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1
;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
; COOKIE: 0b17506cb2b4a93b (echoed)
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;nginx-ss.default.svc.clusterset.local. IN A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
nginx-ss.default.svc.clusterset.local. 5 IN A	10.3.0.5
nginx-ss.default.svc.clusterset.local. 5 IN A	10.3.224.3

;; Query time: 1 msec
;; SERVER: 100.2.0.10#53(100.2.0.10)
;; WHEN: Mon Nov 30 20:18:08 UTC 2020
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 184

bash-5.0#
```

You can also access the individual Pods:

```bash
bash-5.0# nslookup web-0.cluster3.nginx-ss.default.svc.clusterset.local
Server:		100.2.0.10
Address:	100.2.0.10#53

Name:	web-0.cluster3.nginx-ss.default.svc.clusterset.local
Address: 10.3.0.5

bash-5.0# nslookup web-1.cluster3.nginx-ss.default.svc.clusterset.local
Server:		100.2.0.10
Address:	100.2.0.10#53

Name:	web-1.cluster3.nginx-ss.default.svc.clusterset.local
Address: 10.3.224.3

bash-5.0#
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-hard-tabs -->
#### Clean the Created Resources

> To remove the previously created Kubernetes resources, use the following commands on **cluster-3**:

Reviewer: cluster3

> 

Reviewer: would it be easier to create the resources in a dedicated, new namespace? 
personally I find it easier to just delete the whole ns then, and it would demonstrate that the ns needs to be created in both clusters for it to work :)

```bash
$ kubectl config use-context cluster2
Switched to context "cluster2".
```

The command below lists all the Submariner component Pods. Ensure that the STATUS for each is *Running*, noting that some could have an
intermediate transient status, like *Pending* or *ContainerCreating*, indicating they are still starting up. To continuously monitor the
Pods, you can specify the `--watch` flag with the command:

```bash
$ kubectl -n submariner-operator get pods
NAME                                           READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
submariner-gateway-btzrq                       1/1     Running   0          76s
submariner-lighthouse-agent-586cf4899-wn747    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-lighthouse-coredns-c88f64f5-h77kw   1/1     Running   0          73s
submariner-lighthouse-coredns-c88f64f5-qlw4x   1/1     Running   0          73s
submariner-operator-dcbdf5669-n7jgp            1/1     Running   0          89s
submariner-routeagent-bmgbc                    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-routeagent-rl9nh                    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-routeagent-wqmzs                    1/1     Running   0          75s
```

> This command verifies on which Kubernetes node the Gateway Engine is running on:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This command verifies on which Kubernetes node the Gateway Engine is running:
```

```bash
bash-5.0# dig nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local
; <<>> DiG 9.16.6 <<>> nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; WARNING: .local is reserved for Multicast DNS
;; You are currently testing what happens when an mDNS query is leaked to DNS
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 55022
;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1
;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
; COOKIE: 6f9db9800a9a9779 (echoed)
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local. IN	A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local. 5 IN A	100.3.220.176

;; Query time: 5 msec
;; SERVER: 100.3.0.10#53(100.3.0.10)
;; WHEN: Tue Dec 01 07:45:48 UTC 2020
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 125
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-hard-tabs -->

{{% notice note %}}
At this point we have the same `nginx` Service deployed within the nginx-test namespace on both clusters. Note that DNS resolution works,
and the IP address **100.3.220.176** returned is the ClusterIP associated with the *local* nginx Service deployed on **cluster3**. This is

> expected, as Submariner prefers to handle the traffic locally whenever possible.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't actually test that the service from **cluster2** is available since `dig` is run from **cluster3** which will always return the local `ClusterIP`. We should run `dig` from `cluster2` and verify its local `ClusterIP` is returned.

+++
title = "User Guide"
date = 2020-05-04T19:01:14+05:30
weight = 15
+++

## Overview

This guide is intended for users who have a Submariner environment set up and want to verify the installation and learn more about how to
use Submariner and the main capabilities it provides. This guide assumes that there are two Kubernetes clusters,
**cluster2** and **cluster3**, forming a cluster set, and that the Broker is deployed into a separate cluster **cluster1**.

{{% notice tip %}}
Make sure you have `subctl` [set up](../deployment/subctl/#installation). Regardless of how Submariner was deployed, `subctl` can be used
for various verification and troubleshooting tasks, as shown in this guide.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice note %}}
This guide focuses on a non-Globalnet Submariner deployment.
{{% /notice %}}

### 1. Validate the Installation

#### On the Broker

The Broker facilitates the exchange of metadata information between the connected clusters, enabling them to discover one another.

> The Broker consists of a set of Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) only; there are no Pods or Services deployed with it.

Author: @tpantelis can you comment on what would be be more accurate?

> The Broker consists of a set of Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) only; there are no Pods or Services deployed with it.

Reviewer 2: I think @Jaanki suggestion.

This command validates that the Broker namespace has been created in the Broker cluster:

> 

Author: Since multiple clusters are running, you need to choose which cluster `kubectl` talks to. `subctl` will just follow. Perhaps this is something that we need to document as part of https://submariner.io/operations/deployment/subctl/?

> 

Reviewer 3: I think you anyways need to export KUNECONFIG for `kubectl config use-context cluster1` to work.

> 

Author: Done

```bash
$ kubectl config use-context cluster1
Switched to context "cluster1".
```

```bash
$ kubectl get namespace submariner-k8s-broker
NAME                    STATUS   AGE
submariner-k8s-broker   Active   5m
```

This command validates that the Submariner CRDs have been created in the Broker cluster:

```bash
$ kubectl get crds | grep -iE 'submariner|multicluster.x-k8s.io'

> clusters.submariner.io                    2020-11-30T13:49:16Z

Author: For reference. The old Lighthouse CRDs are no longer being used and will be removed with 0.9. Previous code review comments suggested that we only show the MCS ones here.

submariner-lighthouse-agent-586cf4899-wn747    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-lighthouse-coredns-c88f64f5-h77kw   1/1     Running   0          73s
submariner-lighthouse-coredns-c88f64f5-qlw4x   1/1     Running   0          73s
submariner-operator-dcbdf5669-n7jgp            1/1     Running   0          89s
submariner-routeagent-bmgbc                    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-routeagent-rl9nh                    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-routeagent-wqmzs                    1/1     Running   0          75s
```

This command verifies on which Kubernetes node the Gateway Engine is running:

```bash
$ kubectl get node --selector=submariner.io/gateway=true -o wide
NAME              STATUS   ROLES    AGE     VERSION   INTERNAL-IP   EXTERNAL-IP   OS-IMAGE       KERNEL-VERSION           CONTAINER-RUNTIME
cluster2-worker   Ready    worker   6h59m   v1.17.0   172.17.0.7    3.81.125.62   Ubuntu 19.10   5.8.18-200.fc32.x86_64   containerd://1.3.2
```

This command verifies the connection between the participating clusters:
<!-- markdownlint-disable no-trailing-spaces -->
```bash

> $ subctl show connections

Reviewer 3: correct command `subctl show connections --kubecontext cluster2` due to the issue mentioned above.

Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>
API Version:  multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
Kind:         ServiceExport
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2020-12-01T12:35:32Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    302209
  Self Link:           /apis/multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1/namespaces/nginx-test/serviceexports/nginx
  UID:                 afe0533c-7cca-4443-9d8a-aee8e888e8bc
Status:
  Conditions:
    Last Transition Time:  2020-12-01T12:35:32Z
    Message:               Awaiting sync of the ServiceImport to the broker
    Reason:                AwaitingSync
    Status:                False
    Type:                  Valid
    Last Transition Time:  2020-12-01T12:35:32Z
    Message:               Service was successfully synced to the broker
    Reason:                
    Status:                True
    Type:                  Valid
Events:                    <none>
```

Once exported, the Service can be discovered as `nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local` across the cluster set.

##### 3. Consume the Service on **cluster2**

Verify that the exported `nginx` Service was imported to **cluster2** as expected. Submariner (via Lighthouse) automatically creates a

> corresponding `ServiceImport`:

Author: @Jaanki L316 and L318 make it clear that this is on cluster 2. Why highlight this again?

date = 2020-05-04T19:01:14+05:30
weight = 15
+++

## Overview

This guide is intended for users who have a Submariner environment set up and want to verify the installation and learn more about how to
use Submariner and the main capabilities it provides. This guide assumes that there are two Kubernetes clusters,
**cluster2** and **cluster3**, forming a cluster set, and that the Broker is deployed into a separate cluster **cluster1**.

{{% notice tip %}}
Make sure you have `subctl` [set up](../deployment/subctl/#installation). Regardless of how Submariner was deployed, `subctl` can be used
for various verification and troubleshooting tasks, as shown in this guide.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice note %}}
This guide focuses on a non-Globalnet Submariner deployment.
{{% /notice %}}

### 1. Validate the Installation

#### On the Broker

The Broker facilitates the exchange of metadata information between the connected clusters, enabling them to discover one another.
The Broker consists of only a set of Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs); there are no Pods or Services deployed with it.

This command validates that the Broker namespace has been created in the Broker cluster:

```bash

> $ export KUBECONFIG=cluster1/auth/kubeconfig

Reviewer 3: `export KUBECONFIG=cluster1/auth/kubeconfig:cluster2/auth/kubeconfig:cluster3/auth/kubeconfig` would eliminate need to export it at 3 individual places. However, this also works fine.

for various verification and troubleshooting tasks, as shown in this guide.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice note %}}
This guide focuses on a non-Globalnet Submariner deployment.
{{% /notice %}}

### 1. Validate the Installation

#### On the Broker

The Broker facilitates the exchange of metadata information between the connected clusters, enabling them to discover one another.
The Broker consists of a set of Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) only; there are no Pods or Services deployed with it.

You can use this command to validate that the Broker namespace has been created in the Broker cluster:

```bash
$ kubectl config use-context cluster1
Switched to context "cluster1".
```

```bash
$ kubectl get namespace submariner-k8s-broker
NAME                    STATUS   AGE
submariner-k8s-broker   Active   5m
```

You can use this command to validate that the Submariner CRDs have been created in the Broker cluster:

```bash
$ kubectl get crds | grep -iE 'submariner|multicluster.x-k8s.io'
clusters.submariner.io                    2020-11-30T13:49:16Z
endpoints.submariner.io                   2020-11-30T13:49:16Z
gateways.submariner.io                    2020-11-30T13:49:16Z

> serviceimports.lighthouse.submariner.io   2020-11-30T13:49:16Z

Author: Yeah, wanted to capture things "as is", but it makes sense to remove the old one by now.

serviceimports.multicluster.x-k8s.io      2020-11-30T13:52:39Z
```

You can use this command to validate that the participating clusters have successfully joined the Broker:

```bash
$ kubectl -n submariner-k8s-broker get clusters.submariner.io
NAME       AGE
cluster2   5m9s
cluster3   2m9s
```

#### On Connected Clusters

The below commands can be used on either **cluster2** or **cluster3** to verify that the two clusters have successfully formed a cluster set
and are properly connected to each other. In this example, the commands are being issued on **cluster2**.

You can use this command to monitor as all required Submariner components are being installed:

```bash
$ kubectl config use-context cluster2
Switched to context "cluster2".
```

```bash

> $ kubectl -n submariner-operator get pods --watch

Reviewer 4: nit: IMHO, this is looking too verbose.

```

It may take a couple of minutes for all components to come up:

```bash
$ kubectl -n submariner-operator get pods
NAME                                           READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
submariner-gateway-btzrq                       1/1     Running   0          76s
submariner-lighthouse-agent-586cf4899-wn747    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-lighthouse-coredns-c88f64f5-h77kw   1/1     Running   0          73s
submariner-lighthouse-coredns-c88f64f5-qlw4x   1/1     Running   0          73s
submariner-operator-dcbdf5669-n7jgp            1/1     Running   0          89s
submariner-routeagent-bmgbc                    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-routeagent-rl9nh                    1/1     Running   0          75s
submariner-routeagent-wqmzs                    1/1     Running   0          75s
```

You can use this command to verify on which node the Gateway Engine is running on:

```bash
$ kubectl get node --selector=submariner.io/gateway=true -o wide
NAME              STATUS   ROLES    AGE     VERSION   INTERNAL-IP   EXTERNAL-IP   OS-IMAGE       KERNEL-VERSION           CONTAINER-RUNTIME

> cluster2-worker   Ready    <none>   6h59m   v1.17.0   172.17.0.7    <none>        Ubuntu 19.10   5.8.18-200.fc32.x86_64   containerd://1.3.2

Reviewer 4: Here the external-ip is shown as empty. 

On an AWS Cluster, I see the following.
```
[sgaddam@localhost vmware]$ kubectl get node --selector=submariner.io/gateway=true -o wide
NAME                          STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION           INTERNAL-IP   EXTERNAL-IP   OS-IMAGE                                                       KERNEL-VERSION                 CONTAINER-RUNTIME
ip-10-0-44-234.ec2.internal   Ready    worker   56d   v1.18.3+47c0e71   10.0.44.234   3.81.125.62   Red Hat Enterprise Linux CoreOS 45.82.202009181447-0 (Ootpa)   4.18.0-193.23.1.el8_2.x86_64   cri-o://1.18.3-15.rhaos4.5.gitae4ef7b.el8
```

Similarly on a VMWare OnPrem cluster
```
[sgaddam@localhost vmware]$  kubectl get node --selector=submariner.io/gateway=true -o wide
NAME                              STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION           INTERNAL-IP    EXTERNAL-IP    OS-IMAGE                                                       KERNEL-VERSION                 CONTAINER-RUNTIME
hivemind-dev-dkghj-worker-86nns   Ready    worker   41d   v1.18.3+6c42de8   10.1.158.222   10.1.158.222   Red Hat Enterprise Linux CoreOS 45.82.202008290529-0 (Ootpa)   4.18.0-193.14.3.el8_2.x86_64   cri-o://1.18.3-11.rhaos4.5.gite5bcc71.el8
```

cluster3-worker                 cluster3                172.17.0.10     libreswan           100.3.0.0/16, 10.3.0.0/16             connected
```

You can use this command to get detailed information about the inter-cluster connection:

```bash
$ kubectl -n submariner-operator describe Gateway
Name:         cluster2-worker
Namespace:    submariner-operator
Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  update-timestamp: 1606751397
API Version:  submariner.io/v1
Kind:         Gateway
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2020-11-30T13:51:39Z
  Generation:          538
  Resource Version:    28717
  Self Link:           /apis/submariner.io/v1/namespaces/submariner-operator/gateways/cluster2-worker
  UID:                 682f791a-00b5-4f51-8249-80c7c82c4bbf
Status:
  Connections:
    Endpoint:
      Backend:          libreswan
      cable_name:       submariner-cable-cluster3-172-17-0-10
      cluster_id:       cluster3
      Health Check IP:  10.3.224.0
      Hostname:         cluster3-worker
      nat_enabled:      false
      private_ip:       172.17.0.10
      public_ip:        
      Subnets:
        100.3.0.0/16
        10.3.0.0/16
    Latency:

>       Average RTT:   472623

Reviewer 4: Recently we pushed a PR where we are displaying the values as ms/ns etc

      Last RTT:      583181
      Max RTT:       2603444
      Min RTT:       80202
      Stddev RTT:    164687
    Status:          connected
    Status Message:  
  Ha Status:         active
  Local Endpoint:
    Backend:          libreswan
    cable_name:       submariner-cable-cluster2-172-17-0-7
    cluster_id:       cluster2
    Health Check IP:  10.2.224.0
    Hostname:         cluster2-worker
    nat_enabled:      false
    private_ip:       172.17.0.7
    public_ip:        
    Subnets:
      100.2.0.0/16
      10.2.0.0/16
  Status Failure:  
  Version:         v0.8.0-pre0-1-g5d7f163
Events:            <none>
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-trailing-spaces -->

> To verify that service discovery is installed properly, validate that the Submariner CRDs have been created in the cluster:

Reviewer 4: Shall we say "Lighthouse" is installed properly?

```

Verify that CoreDNS was properly configured to forward requests sent to `clusterset.local` to Lighthouse CoreDNS Server in the
cluster:

```bash
$ kubectl -n kube-system describe configmap coredns
Name:         coredns
Namespace:    kube-system
Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>

Data
====
Corefile:
----
#lighthouse-start AUTO-GENERATED SECTION. DO NOT EDIT
clusterset.local:53 {
    forward . 100.2.177.123
}
#lighthouse-end
.:53 {
    errors
    health {
       lameduck 5s
    }
    ready
    kubernetes cluster2.local in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa {
       pods insecure
       fallthrough in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa
       ttl 30
    }
    prometheus :9153
    forward . /etc/resolv.conf
    cache 30
    loop
    reload
    loadbalance
}
```

Note that **100.2.177.123** is the ClusterIP address of the `submariner-lighthouse-coredns` Service we verified earlier.

### 2. Export Services Across Clusters

At this point, we have enabled secure IP communication between the connected clusters and formed the cluster set infrastructure. However,
further configuration is required in order to signify that a Service should be visible and discoverable to other clusters in the cluster

> set. This can be done by creating a `ServiceExport` object in each cluster within the namespace that the underlying Service resides in.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
set. This can be done by creating a `ServiceExport` object in a cluster within the namespace that the underlying Service resides in.
```

> set. This can be done by creating a `ServiceExport` object in each cluster within the namespace that the underlying Service resides in.
> When a `ServiceExport` is created, this will cause the multi-cluster Service to become accessible as `<service>.<ns>.svc.clusterset.local`.
> Similarly, deleting the `ServiceExport` will stop exporting the Service.

Reviewer 2: I suggest we keep it high-level here and defer talking about the `ServiceExport` detail until the section below.  

```suggestion
set. In following sections, we will define a Service and show how to export it to other clusters.
```

This guide uses a simple nginx server for demonstration purposes.

{{% notice note %}}
In the example below, we create the nginx resources within the nginx-test namespace. Note that the namespace must be created in both
clusters for service discovery to work properly.
{{% /notice %}}

#### Test ClusterIP Services

A Kubernetes Service is an abstraction which defines a logical set of Pods running in your cluster, that all provide the same functionality.
When created, each Service is assigned a unique IP address. This address is tied to the lifespan of the Service.
Pods can be configured to talk to the Service, and know that communication to the Service will be automatically load-balanced out to some
Pod that is a member of the Service. ClusterIP is the default ServiceType in Kubernetes, and is only accessible from within the cluster.

> Submariner makes it possible for a ClusterIP Service to be accessible across cluster boundaries.

Reviewer 2: It's seems reasonable to assume here that the user understands what a k8s Service is and how it works. I think we can omit this section entirely.

##### 1. Create an `nginx` Deployment on **cluster3**

```bash
$ kubectl config use-context cluster3
Switched to context "cluster3".
```

```bash
$ kubectl create namespace nginx-test
namespace/nginx-test created

$ kubectl -n nginx-test create deployment nginx --image=nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged:stable-alpine
deployment.apps/nginx created

$ kubectl -n nginx-test expose deployment nginx --port=8080
service/nginx exposed
```

This will create an `nginx` Service on the nginx-test namespace which targets TCP port 8080 on any Pod with the `app: nginx` label, and
expose it on an abstracted Service port. When created, the Service is assigned a unique IP address (also called ClusterIP):

```bash
$ kubectl -n nginx-test get service nginx
NAME    TYPE        CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE
nginx   ClusterIP   100.3.220.176  <none>        8080/TCP   2m41s
```

```bash
$ kubectl -n nginx-test get pods -l app=nginx -o wide
NAME                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP         NODE                NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES

> nginx-667744f849-t26s5   1/1     Running   0          3m    10.3.0.5   cluster3-worker2    <none>           <none>

Reviewer 2: I assume these commands are to verify the service was created and running. We should preface these commands stating that.

```

##### 2. Export the Service

In order to signify that the Service should be visible and discoverable to other clusters in the cluster set, a `ServiceExport` needs to be

> created. The `subctl export` command can be used to automatically create the required `ServiceExport` object:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
created. This is done using the  `subctl export` command:
```

```bash
$ subctl export service --namespace nginx-test nginx
Service exported successfully
```

> Verify that the `ServiceExport` object has been created for the `nginx` Service within the nginx-test namespace:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After creation of the `ServiceExport`, the `nginx` Service will be exported to other clusters via the Broker. The Status information on the `ServiceExport` object will indicate this:
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable no-trailing-spaces -->
```bash
$ kubectl -n nginx-test describe serviceexports
Name:         nginx
Namespace:    nginx-test
Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>
API Version:  multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
Kind:         ServiceExport
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2020-12-01T12:35:32Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    302209
  Self Link:           /apis/multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1/namespaces/nginx-test/serviceexports/nginx
  UID:                 afe0533c-7cca-4443-9d8a-aee8e888e8bc
Status:
  Conditions:
    Last Transition Time:  2020-12-01T12:35:32Z
    Message:               Awaiting sync of the ServiceImport to the broker
    Reason:                AwaitingSync
    Status:                False
    Type:                  Valid
    Last Transition Time:  2020-12-01T12:35:32Z
    Message:               Service was successfully synced to the broker
    Reason:                
    Status:                True
    Type:                  Valid
Events:                    <none>

```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-trailing-spaces -->

> When the Service is exported successfully, it can be discovered as `nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local` across the cluster set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once exported, the Service can be discovered as `nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local` across the cluster set.
```

</body>
</html>
```
<!-- markdownlint-disable no-hard-tabs -->
```bash
bash-5.0# dig nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local
; <<>> DiG 9.16.6 <<>> nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; WARNING: .local is reserved for Multicast DNS
;; You are currently testing what happens when an mDNS query is leaked to DNS
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 34800
;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1
;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
; COOKIE: 6ff7ea72c14ce2d4 (echoed)
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local. IN	A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local. 5 IN A	100.3.220.176

;; Query time: 16 msec
;; SERVER: 100.2.0.10#53(100.2.0.10)
;; WHEN: Mon Nov 30 17:52:55 UTC 2020
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 125
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-hard-tabs -->
Note that DNS resolution works across the clusters, and that the IP address **100.3.220.176** returned is the same ClusterIP associated with
the `nginx` Service on **cluster3**.

##### 4. Create an `nginx` Deployment on **cluster2**

> If multiple clusters export a Service with the same name and from the same namespace, it will be recognized as a single combined Service.
> To test this, let's deploy the same `nginx` Service, this time on the nginx-test namespace on **cluster2**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If multiple clusters export a Service with the same name and from the same namespace, it will be recognized as a single logical Service.
To test this, we'll deploy the same `nginx` Service in the same namespace on **cluster2**:
```

```bash
$ kubectl -n nginx-test create deployment nginx --image=nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged:stable-alpine
deployment.apps/nginx created

$ kubectl -n nginx-test expose deployment nginx --port=8080
service/nginx exposed
```

> This will create an `nginx` Service on the nginx-test namespace which targets TCP port 8080 on any Pod with the `app: nginx` label, and
> expose it on an abstracted Service port. When created, the Service is assigned a unique IP address (also called ClusterIP):

Reviewer 2: This is talked about in a prior section - I don't think we need to repeat here.

```suggestion
Verify the Service exists and is running:
```

```bash
$ kubectl -n nginx-test get service nginx
NAME    TYPE        CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE
nginx   ClusterIP   100.2.29.136   <none>        8080/TCP   1m40s
```

```bash
$ kubectl -n nginx-test get pods -l app=nginx -o wide
NAME                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP           NODE              NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
nginx-5578584966-d7sj7   1/1     Running   0          22s   10.2.224.3   cluster2-worker   <none>           <none>
```

##### 5. Export the Service on **cluster2**

> In order to signify that the Service should be visible and discoverable to other clusters in the cluster set, a `ServiceExport` needs to be
> created. The `subctl export` command can be used to automatically create the required `ServiceExport` object:

Reviewer 2: We don't need to repeat the detail from above.

```suggestion
As before, use the `subctl export` command to export the service:
```

```bash
$ subctl export service --namespace nginx-test nginx
Service exported successfully
```

##### 6. Consume the Service from **cluster3**

First, verify that the exported `nginx` Service was imported to **cluster3** as expected. Submariner (via Lighthouse) automatically
creates a corresponding `ServiceImport`:

```bash
$ kubectl config use-context cluster3
Switched to context "cluster3".
```

```bash
$ kubectl get -n submariner-operator serviceimport
NAME                        TYPE           IP               AGE
nginx-nginx-test-cluster2   ClusterSetIP   [100.2.29.136]   62s

> ```

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need this part here as the ServiceImport would already have been created from the initial export on cluster3.

Author: Indeed!

;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 55022
;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1
;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
; COOKIE: 6f9db9800a9a9779 (echoed)
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local. IN	A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
nginx.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local. 5 IN A	100.3.220.176

;; Query time: 5 msec
;; SERVER: 100.3.0.10#53(100.3.0.10)
;; WHEN: Tue Dec 01 07:45:48 UTC 2020
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 125
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-hard-tabs -->

{{% notice note %}}
At this point we have the same `nginx` Service deployed within the nginx-test namespace on both clusters. Note that DNS resolution works,
and the IP address **100.3.220.176** returned is the ClusterIP associated with the *local* nginx Service deployed on **cluster3**. This is
expected, as Submariner prefers to handle the traffic locally whenever possible.
{{% /notice %}}

#### Service Discovery for Services Deployed to Multiple Clusters

Submariner follows this logic for service discovery across the cluster set:

> * If an exported Service is not available in the local cluster, Lighthosue DNS returns the IP address of the ClusterIP Service from one of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If an exported Service is not available in the local cluster, Lighthouse DNS returns the IP address of the ClusterIP Service from one of
```

Selector:           app.kubernetes.io/instance=nginx-ss,app.kubernetes.io/name=nginx-ss
Labels:             <none>
Annotations:        <none>
Replicas:           2 desired | 2 total
Update Strategy:    RollingUpdate
  Partition:        0
Pods Status:        2 Running / 0 Waiting / 0 Succeeded / 0 Failed
Pod Template:
  Labels:  app.kubernetes.io/instance=nginx-ss
           app.kubernetes.io/name=nginx-ss
  Containers:
   nginx-ss:
    Image:        nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged:stable-alpine
    Port:         80/TCP
    Host Port:    0/TCP
    Environment:  <none>
    Mounts:       <none>
  Volumes:        <none>
Volume Claims:    <none>
Events:
  Type    Reason            Age   From                    Message
  ----    ------            ----  ----                    -------
  Normal  SuccessfulCreate  94s   statefulset-controller  create Pod web-0 in StatefulSet web successful
  Normal  SuccessfulCreate  85s   statefulset-controller  create Pod web-1 in StatefulSet web successful
```

##### 2. Export the Service on **cluster-3**

In order to signify that the Service should be visible and discoverable to other clusters in the cluster set, a `ServiceExport` needs to be

> created. The `subctl export` command can be used to automatically create the required `ServiceExport` object:

Reviewer 2: We can omit this detail.

```bash
$ subctl export service --namespace nginx-test nginx-ss
Service exported successfully
```

> Verify that the `ServiceExport` object has been created for the `nginx-ss` Service within the nginx-test namespace:

Reviewer 2: See my comments in the similar section above.

<!-- markdownlint-disable no-trailing-spaces -->
```bash
$ kubectl -n nginx-test describe serviceexport nginx-ss
Name:         nginx-ss
Namespace:    nginx-test
Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>
API Version:  multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
Kind:         ServiceExport
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2020-11-30T19:59:44Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    83431
  Self Link:           /apis/multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1/namespaces/nginx-test/serviceexports/nginx-ss
  UID:                 2c0d6419-6160-431e-990c-8a9993363b10
Status:
  Conditions:
    Last Transition Time:  2020-11-30T19:59:44Z
    Message:               Awaiting sync of the ServiceImport to the broker
    Reason:                AwaitingSync
    Status:                False
    Type:                  Valid
    Last Transition Time:  2020-11-30T19:59:44Z
    Message:               Service was successfully synced to the broker
    Reason:                
    Status:                True
    Type:                  Valid
Events:                    <none>
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-trailing-spaces -->

> When the Service is exported successfully, it can be discovered as `nginx-ss.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local` across the cluster set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the Service is exported successfully, it can be discovered as `nginx-ss.nginx-test.svc.clusterset.local` across the cluster set.
```

+++
title = "User Guide"
date = 2020-05-04T19:01:14+05:30
weight = 15
+++

## Overview

This guide is intended for users who have a Submariner environment set up and want to verify the installation and learn more about how to
use Submariner and the main capabilities it provides. This guide assumes that there are two Kubernetes clusters,
**cluster2** and **cluster3**, forming a clusterset, and that the Broker is deployed into a separate cluster **cluster1**.

{{% notice tip %}}
Make sure you have `subctl` [set up](../deployment/subctl/#installation). Regardless of how Submariner was deployed, `subctl` can be used
for various verification and troubleshooting tasks, as shown in this guide.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice note %}}
This guide focuses on a non-Globalnet Submariner deployment.
{{% /notice %}}

> ### 1. Validate the Installation

Reviewer 5: May be all the validate installation stuff should be a different guide? troubleshooting?

It's weird if a usage guide starts by digging into the "low level" details :)

Author: I think that we need to separate between "verification" (i.e I just deployed Submariner and I want to know that it's up and running before I use it) and "troubleshooting" (i.e something went wrong). I agree that currently there is some overlap between the content I am proposing here and our "Troubleshooting Guide", but IMO we should fix/enhance the Troubleshooting Guide.

In any case, having accurate and up-to-date content is the most important thing; we can always move things around ;)

    Type:                  Valid
    Last Transition Time:  2020-12-01T12:35:32Z
    Message:               Service was successfully synced to the broker
    Reason:                
    Status:                True
    Type:                  Valid
Events:                    <none>

```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-trailing-spaces -->
When the Service is exported successfully, it can be discovered as `nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local` across the clusterset.

##### 3. Consume the Service on **cluster2**

First, verify that the exported `nginx` Service was imported to **cluster2** as expected. Submariner (via Lighthouse) automatically
creates a corresponding `ServiceImport`:

```bash
$ kubectl config use-context cluster2
Switched to context "cluster2".
```

```bash
$ kubectl get -n submariner-operator serviceimport
NAME                     TYPE           IP                AGE
nginx-default-cluster3   ClusterSetIP   [100.3.220.176]   13m
```

Next, run a test Pod on **cluster2** and try to access the `nginx` Service from within the Pod:

```bash
$ kubectl -n default  run --generator=run-pod/v1 \
tmp-shell --rm -i --tty --image quay.io/submariner/nettest -- /bin/bash
```

```bash

> bash-5.0# curl nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
bash-5.0# curl nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local:8080
```

due to my other suggestion, sorry.

Author: Oh, good catch. Sorry!

```

##### 5. Export the Service on **cluster2**

In order to signify that the Service should be visible and discoverable to other clusters in the clusterset, a `ServiceExport` needs to be
created. The `subctl export` command can be used to automatically create the required `ServiceExport` object:

```bash
$ subctl export service --namespace default nginx
Service exported successfully
```

##### 6. Consume the Service from **cluster3**

First, verify that the exported `nginx` Service was imported to **cluster3** as expected. Submariner (via Lighthouse) automatically
creates a corresponding `ServiceImport`:

```bash
$ kubectl config use-context cluster3
Switched to context "cluster3".
```

```bash
$ kubectl get -n submariner-operator serviceimport
NAME                     TYPE           IP               AGE
nginx-default-cluster2   ClusterSetIP   [100.2.29.136]   62s
```

Next, run a test Pod on **cluster3** and try to access the `nginx` Service from within the Pod:

```bash
$ kubectl -n default  run --generator=run-pod/v1 \
tmp-shell --rm -i --tty --image quay.io/submariner/nettest -- /bin/bash
```

```bash

> bash-5.0# curl nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
bash-5.0# curl nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local:8080
```

clusterset.local:53 {
    forward . 100.2.177.123
}
#lighthouse-end
.:53 {
    errors
    health {
       lameduck 5s
    }
    ready
    kubernetes cluster2.local in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa {
       pods insecure
       fallthrough in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa
       ttl 30
    }
    prometheus :9153
    forward . /etc/resolv.conf
    cache 30
    loop
    reload
    loadbalance
}
```

Note that **100.2.177.123** is the ClusterIP address of the `submariner-lighthouse-coredns` Service we verified earlier.

### 2. Export Services Across Clusters

At this point, we have enabled secure IP communication between the connected clusters. However, further configuration is required in order
to signify that a Service should be visible and discoverable to other clusters in the clusterset. This can be done by creating a
`ServiceExport` object in each cluster within the namespace that the underlying Service resides in. When a `ServiceExport` is created, this
will cause the multi-cluster Service to become accessible as `<service>.<ns>.svc.clusterset.local`. Similarly, deleting the `ServiceExport`
will stop exporting the Service.

This guide uses a simple nginx server for demonstration purposes.

> #### Test ClusterIP Service

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### Exporting ClusterIP Services
```

Author: I prefer to leave this one as "Test ClusterIP Services", because we have a seperate "Export the Service" sub-step down the page.

A Kubernetes Service is an abstraction which defines a logical set of Pods running in your cluster, that all provide the same functionality.
When created, each Service is assigned a unique IP address. This address is tied to the lifespan of the Service.
Pods can be configured to talk to the Service, and know that communication to the Service will be automatically load-balanced out to some
Pod that is a member of the Service. ClusterIP is the default ServiceType in Kubernetes, and is only accessible from within the cluster.
Submariner makes it possible for a ClusterIP Service to be accessible across cluster boundaries.

##### 1. Create an `nginx` Pod on **cluster3**

> Create a Pod with the following Deployment specification:

Reviewer 5: Shall we may be use the simple cmdlines we have on the quickstart?, this would limit the focus we put on deploying the pod, which is less important to this guide.

Let's also use the unprivileged nginx.

```bash
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      run: nginx
  replicas: 1
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        run: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: nginx
        image: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
```

Apply the configuration and check that the Pod is running:

```bash
kubectl apply -f ./nginx-pod.yaml
```

```bash
$ kubectl get pods -l run=nginx -o wide
NAME                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP         NODE               NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
nginx-86c57db685-twxz4   1/1     Running   0          3m    10.3.0.4   cluster3-worker2   <none>           <none>
```

##### 2. Create an `nginx` Service on **cluster3**

> `kubectl apply` the following yaml:

Reviewer 5: Same: let's use the single cmdline "expose" kubectl command

<!-- markdownlint-disable no-trailing-spaces -->
```bash
$ kubectl describe serviceexports
Name:         nginx
Namespace:    default
Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>
API Version:  multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
Kind:         ServiceExport
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2020-11-30T17:18:44Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    48072
  Self Link:           /apis/multicluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1/namespaces/default/serviceexports/nginx
  UID:                 00096bcb-6383-4345-875b-4050f7b1a3a1
Status:
  Conditions:
    Last Transition Time:  2020-11-30T17:18:44Z
    Message:               Awaiting sync of the ServiceImport to the broker
    Reason:                AwaitingSync
    Status:                False
    Type:                  Valid
    Last Transition Time:  2020-11-30T17:18:44Z
    Message:               Service was successfully synced to the broker
    Reason:                
    Status:                True
    Type:                  Valid
Events:                    <none>
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-trailing-spaces -->
When the Service is exported successfully, it can be discovered as `nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local` across the clusterset.

> ##### 4. Test Service Discovery on **cluster2**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
##### 4.  Consume the service on **cluster2**
```

;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; WARNING: .local is reserved for Multicast DNS
;; You are currently testing what happens when an mDNS query is leaked to DNS
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 34800
;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1
;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
; COOKIE: 6ff7ea72c14ce2d4 (echoed)
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local. IN	A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local. 5 IN A	100.3.220.176

;; Query time: 16 msec
;; SERVER: 100.2.0.10#53(100.2.0.10)
;; WHEN: Mon Nov 30 17:52:55 UTC 2020
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 125
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-hard-tabs -->
Note that DNS resolution works across the clusters, and that the IP address **100.3.220.176** returned is the same ClusterIP associated with
the `nginx` Service on **cluster3**.

##### 5. Create an `nginx` Service on **cluster2**

If multiple clusters export a Service with the same name and from the same namespace, they will be recognized as a single combined Service.
To test this, let's deploy the same `nginx` Service, this time on **cluster2**:

> Create a Pod with the following Deployment specification:

Reviewer 5: same, use the simple: `kubectl -n default create deployment nginx --image=nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged:stable-alpine`

```bash
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      run: nginx
  replicas: 1
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        run: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: nginx
        image: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
```

Apply the configuration and check that the Pod is running:

```bash
kubectl apply -f ./nginx-pod.yaml
```

```bash
$ kubectl get pods -l run=nginx -o wide
NAME                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP           NODE              NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
nginx-5578584966-d7sj7   1/1     Running   0          22s   10.2.224.3   cluster2-worker   <none>           <none>
```

> To create an `nginx` Service, `kubectl apply` the following yaml:

Reviewer 5: kubectl -n default expose deployment nginx --port=8080

```bash
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: nginx
  labels:
    run: nginx
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 80
    protocol: TCP
  selector:
    run: nginx
```

```bash
kubectl apply -f ./nginx-service.yaml
```

When created, the Service is assigned a unique IP address (also called ClusterIP):

```bash
$ kubectl get service nginx
NAME    TYPE        CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)   AGE
nginx   ClusterIP   100.2.29.136   <none>        80/TCP    13s
```

##### 6. Export the Service

In order to signify that the Service should be visible and discoverable to other clusters in the clusterset, a `ServiceExport` needs to be
created. The `subctl export` command can be used to automatically create the required `ServiceExport` object:

```bash
subctl export service --namespace default nginx
Service exported successfully
```

> ##### 7. Test Service Discovery on **cluster3**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
##### 7. Consume the Service from **cluster3**
```

#### On the Broker

The Broker facilitates the exchange of metadata information between the connected clusters, enabling them to discover one another.
The Broker consists of a set of Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) only; there are no Pods or Services deployed with it.

You can use this command to validate that the Broker namespace has been created in the Broker cluster:

```bash
$ kubectl get namespace submariner-k8s-broker
NAME                    STATUS   AGE
submariner-k8s-broker   Active   5m
```

You can use this command to validate that the Submariner CRDs have been created in the Broker cluster:

```bash
$ kubectl get crd | grep submariner
clusters.submariner.io                    2020-11-30T13:49:16Z
endpoints.submariner.io                   2020-11-30T13:49:16Z
gateways.submariner.io                    2020-11-30T13:49:16Z
serviceimports.lighthouse.submariner.io   2020-11-30T13:49:16Z
```

You can use this command to validate that the participating clusters have successfully joined the Broker:

```bash
$ kubectl -n submariner-k8s-broker get clusters.submariner.io
NAME       AGE
cluster2   5m9s
cluster3   2m9s
```

#### On Connected Clusters

> The below commands can be used on either **cluster2** or **cluster3** to verify that the two clusters have successfully formed a clusterset

Reviewer 6: Should also add step to verify CRD installation on connected clusters. Just because they're all installed correctly on broker doesn't mean they might be on connected clusters too. Also, on connected clusters we need to make sure `serviceexports` CRD is installed even if it is not needed on broker.

<p>For online documentation and support please refer to
<a href="http://nginx.org/">nginx.org</a>.<br/>
Commercial support is available at
<a href="http://nginx.com/">nginx.com</a>.</p>

<p><em>Thank you for using nginx.</em></p>
</body>
</html>
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable no-hard-tabs -->
```bash
bash-5.0# dig nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local
; <<>> DiG 9.16.6 <<>> nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; WARNING: .local is reserved for Multicast DNS
;; You are currently testing what happens when an mDNS query is leaked to DNS
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 55022
;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1
;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
; COOKIE: 6f9db9800a9a9779 (echoed)
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local. IN	A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local. 5 IN A	100.2.29.136

;; Query time: 5 msec
;; SERVER: 100.3.0.10#53(100.3.0.10)
;; WHEN: Tue Dec 01 07:45:48 UTC 2020
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 125
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-hard-tabs -->

> {{% notice note %}}

Reviewer 6: This should be restrucutred to be something like a list to make it easier to read and understand. Maybe a separate section, like 
```
##### Service Discovery for Service in multiple clusters
If a service is exported from multiple clusters, IP returned follows these rules

* If service is exported from local cluster, it will always return IP of local service.
* If service is not exported locally, it will return service IP from one of the remote clusters where service is exported.
* If exported from multiple remote clusters, round robin is used to return IP from _connected_ clusters only. Any clusters currently in disconnected state are ignored by round robin.
* Users can access service from a specific cluster by prefixing service query with cluster-id `<cluster-id>.<svcname>.<namespace>.svc.clusterset.local`
```

to access the `nginx` Service as `nginx.default.svc.clusterset.local`, Lighthouse DNS resolves the Service as **100.3.220.176** which is the
local ClusterIP Service on **cluster3**.

> * If multiple clusters export a Service with the same name and from the same namespace, Lighthosue DNS load-balances between the clusters

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If multiple clusters export a Service with the same name and from the same namespace, Lighthouse DNS load-balances between the clusters
```
